---
layout: post
title: "'Deep Work' in science: emails"
date: 2018-06-05
---

I recently read "Deep Work: *Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World*" by Cal Newport, and have been thinking about how the ideas presented can be applied to careers in science. The book is aimed specifically at "knowledge workers"--those whose value is derived by meaningfully processing data (quantitatively or intuitively) to accomplish some task.

Whereas many businesses have adopted open office spaces and forced adoption of constant connectivity through Slack/IM/email, Cal Newport suggests that primitive productivity management strategies work better for most employees. In short, the strategies promoted in *Deep Work* can be described as the antithesis of the hyperconnected office.

One of the central points of the book is that the value generated by knowledge workers requires intense focus rather than the constant and  shallow querying/answering encouraged within highly connected workplaces.

Within the academic biomedical ecosystem, the people "doing the science" are Cal's knowledge workers, e.g. grad students, postdocs, technicians, and the occasional faculty member. As faculty members transition into primarily management positions from more hands-on roles,  Cal admits that Deep Work practices are either less applicable or start to look materially different in these cases. For many of these senior workers, email becomes more of a necessity and connectivity with trainees is of greater value. The Deep Work they still engage in shifts from analytic to creative (e.g. grant-writing) and feedback-oriented (e.g. manuscript revisions). So Deep Work should still be pervasive in these advanced roles; it just makes up less of their total effort.

In Cal's world, most people in academia should try to adopt working schedules that allow them to work the majority of their hours in isolation. One of the first recommendations that Cal makes is substantially reducing the frequency of email usage. He goes to great lengths to reinforce the idea that while a few people might get angry with a sudden drop in response time, the world works just fine if you don't respond to an email for 24 hours (unless you have a looming deadline you aren't prepared for, for which other people depend on you). This is something that I am terrible at since I love being the first to hear about anything, but I feel better and less anxious when I manage to constrain my email checking habits. I fear that this might not be possible for those in academia with advisors that expect instantaneous responses to all emails, so I'm fortunate to have the freedom to at least *try* the disconnected approach.

I haven't found a system that works for me. I use google's Inbox as my email client, and I always have a chrome browser open with many tabs of unread papers/stack overflow pages, which means that I always have an Inbox tab open... It just takes one file that I need to find in my emails, or one question someone asked that I need to look up again, for me to get distracted from a new citation alert or exciting new data. I've yet to find a great system for compartmentalizing my current workload such that I don't get exposed to the future workload while trying to clear my docket... But I'll keep trying.
